Exercise 1: Database Selection
Choose the appropriate database type (SQL/NoSQL) and justify:
1. Online banking system
Ans: 
Online Banking System — SQL Database
An online banking system should use a SQL (Relational) database because 
it handles highly sensitive financial data that requires accuracy and reliability. 
Banking operations such as money transfers, deposits, and withdrawals require ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) transactions
to ensure that every transaction is completed correctly without data loss. SQL databases
also support structured relationships between tables such as customers, accounts, and transactions.

2. Social media platform
Ans:
Social Media Platform — NoSQL Database
A social media platform should use a NoSQL database because it manages large amounts of unstructured 
and rapidly growing data such as posts, comments, likes, images, and videos. 
These platforms require high scalability to support millions of users simultaneously.
NoSQL databases provide flexible schemas that allow different types of content to be stored easily without predefined table structures.
They also support horizontal scaling, making them ideal for handling large distributed systems.


3. Real-time chat application
Ans:
Real-Time Chat Application — NoSQL Database
A real-time chat application should use a NoSQL database because it requires fast message storage and quick data retrieval. 
Chat systems generate a large number of messages continuously and require real-time communication between users.
NoSQL databases allow flexible storage of messages, user data, and chat histories without strict schemas.
They also provide high-speed read and write operations, making them suitable for handling real-time data flow. 
Therefore, NoSQL databases such as MongoDB or Firebase are commonly used for real-time chat applications.

4. Hospital patient records
Ans:
Hospital Patient Records — SQL Database
Hospital patient record systems should use a SQL database because they involve structured data that must be stored accurately and securely.
Patient information such as medical history, prescriptions, appointments, and billing records must be well organized and easily accessible.
SQL databases support relationships between multiple tables such as patients, doctors, treatments, and reports.
They also ensure data consistency and reliability, which is crucial in healthcare systems. 

5. IoT sensor data collection
Ans:
IoT Sensor Data Collection — NoSQL Database

IoT sensor data collection systems should use a NoSQL database because they generate massive amounts of continuous data from multiple devices. 
This data is often semi-structured and arrives at high speed, requiring databases that can handle large-scale data efficiently. 
NoSQL databases support horizontal scaling and flexible data storage, making them suitable for storing time-series sensor data. 
They can also process large volumes of data quickly without affecting performance. 




Exercise 2: CAP Theorem Analysis
For each scenario, identify which CAP properties are prioritized:
1. Stock trading platform
Ans:
Stock Trading Platform - A stock trading platform prioritizes Consistency and Partition Tolerance (CP) because financial transactions require highly accurate and up-to-date data.
In stock trading, it is essential that users see the correct stock prices and balances at all times to avoid incorrect trades or financial losses.
Even during network failures or partitions, the system must maintain consistent records of transactions.
Although availability may be temporarily reduced during network issues, maintaining data correctness is more critical than ensuring immediate access.
Therefore, stock trading platforms typically prioritize Consistency and Partition Tolerance.

2. Content delivery network
Ans:
A Content Delivery Network (CDN) prioritizes Availability and Partition Tolerance (AP) because its main purpose is to deliver content
such as images, videos, and web pages quickly to users across different locations. Even if some network nodes fail or
become unreachable, the system should continue serving content from other available servers.
Slight inconsistencies, such as serving slightly outdated content, are acceptable as long as the service remains accessible.

3. Airline booking system
Ans:
An airline booking system prioritizes Consistency and Partition Tolerance (CP) because it must prevent
issues such as double booking of seats. The system needs to ensure that once a seat is booked, it is immediately updated
across all servers to avoid conflicts. During network partitions, the system may temporarily limit availability to ensure accurate booking records. 
Maintaining consistent data about seat availability is more important than always being accessible.

4. Video streaming service
Ans:
A video streaming service prioritizes Availability and Partition Tolerance (AP) because users expect uninterrupted access to videos and streaming content. 
Even if some parts of the network fail, the system should continue providing content from other servers.
Minor inconsistencies, such as slightly outdated recommendations or buffering adjustments, are acceptable as long as users can continue watching videos.




Exercise 3: MongoDB Operations
Create a database for a library system with operations for:
1. Adding new books
Ans: use library
db.books.insertMany([
{
  title: "Harry Potter",
  author: "J.K. Rowling",
  genre: "Fantasy",
  available: true,
  publishedYear: 1997
},
{
  title: "Rich Dad Poor Dad",
  author: "Robert Kiyosaki",
  genre: "Finance",
  available: true,
  publishedYear: 1997
}
])

2. Finding Books by Author
Ans: db.books.find(
  { author: "J.K. Rowling" },
  { _id: 0, title: 1, genre: 1 }
)

3. Updating Book Availability
Ans: db.books.updateOne(
  { title: "Harry Potter" },
  { $set: { available: false } }
)

4. Tracking borrowed books by user
Ans: db.borrowedBooks.find({
  userName: "Sambhav"
})




Exercise 4: JSON to BSON Convert the following JSON to proper BSON types: { "orderId": "12345", "orderDate": "2024-01-15", "totalAmount": "99.99", "items": ["item1", "item2"] }
Ans:
{
  orderId: 12345,
  orderDate: ISODate("2024-01-15T00:00:00Z"),
  totalAmount: NumberDecimal("99.99"),
  items: ["item1", "item2"]
}




Assessment Questions
Q-1. Explain the key differences between SQL and NoSQL databases with examples.
Ans: The key differences between SQL and NoSQL databases include data structure, 
scalability, schema flexibility, and transaction handling. 
SQL databases store structured data in tables and are vertically scalable,
meaning performance is improved by increasing server capacity. 
In contrast, NoSQL databases store data in formats such as documents, 
key-value pairs, graphs, or columns and are horizontally scalable, 
meaning more servers can be added to handle increasing data loads.
SQL databases are best suited for applications requiring strict consistency and 
structured relationships, while NoSQL databases are ideal for applications that require flexibility, speed, and scalability.

Examples:
1. A banking system typically uses an SQL database such as MySQL because it requires secure transactions and data consistency.
2. A social media platform like Instagram or Facebook commonly uses NoSQL databases such as MongoDB because it handles large volumes of unstructured user-generated content.


Q-2. What does the CAP theorem state, and why can’t a distributed system guarantee all three properties?
Ans: The CAP theorem states that a distributed database system can guarantee only two out of three properties 
at the same time: Consistency, Availability, and Partition Tolerance.
Consistency means that all nodes in the system see the same data at the same time, ensuring that every read returns the most recent write.
Availability means that every request made to the system receives a response, even if some nodes are not functioning properly.
Partition Tolerance means that the system continues to operate even when there is a communication failure or network partition between nodes.
A distributed system cannot guarantee all three properties simultaneously because network failures, also known as partitions, are unavoidable in distributed environments. When a network partition occurs, the system must choose between maintaining Consistency or maintaining Availability. If the system chooses consistency, it may reject some requests until data is synchronized, reducing availability. If it chooses availability, it may allow responses with outdated or inconsistent data. Since partition tolerance is necessary for distributed systems to function across multiple networked nodes, the system must sacrifice either consistency or availability during a partition.
Therefore, it is impossible for a distributed system to fully guarantee all three CAP properties at the same time.


Q-3. Describe Three Scenarios Where MongoDB Would Be Preferred Over a Relational Database.
Ans. MongoDB would be preferred over a relational database in scenarios where data is large, 
flexible, and rapidly changing. The first scenario is a social media platform, where large volumes of unstructured data 
such as posts, comments, likes, images, and videos are generated continuously.
MongoDB allows flexible document-based storage, making it easy to store different types of content without requiring a fixed schema.
It also supports horizontal scaling, which helps handle millions of users efficiently.

The second scenario is a real-time chat application, where fast data storage and retrieval
are required to manage continuous message exchanges between users.
MongoDB is suitable for chat systems because it supports high write speeds and flexible 
data models, allowing messages, timestamps, and user information to be stored efficiently. 
Its ability to handle large volumes of real-time data makes it more effective than traditional relational databases for messaging applications.

The third scenario is IoT (Internet of Things) data collection systems, where sensors continuously generate large amounts of data at high speed. 
MongoDB can handle time-series data and store semi-structured data from various devices without strict schema requirements. 
Its distributed architecture allows efficient storage and processing of massive datasets, making it ideal for applications 
such as smart homes, environmental monitoring, and industrial automation.


Q-4. Why does MongoDB use BSON internally instead of storing documents as JSON?
Ans. MongoDB uses BSON (Binary JSON) internally instead of plain JSON because BSON provides better performance,
efficiency, and additional data type support. While JSON is a human-readable text format, BSON is a binary-encoded
format that allows faster data storage and retrieval. BSON supports more data types than JSON, such as Date, ObjectId, 
Binary data, and Decimal, which are essential for efficient database operations. 
It also stores data in a format that is easier for computers to process, reducing parsing time and improving query performance.

Another reason MongoDB uses BSON is that it allows efficient indexing and faster traversal of documents.
BSON includes metadata about the size and structure of each element, making it easier to locate fields without scanning the entire document. 
Additionally, BSON supports larger and more complex data structures, enabling MongoDB to handle nested documents and arrays efficiently.
Therefore, BSON is preferred over JSON because it improves speed, supports richer data types, and enhances overall database performance 
while still maintaining compatibility with JSON-like document structures.


Q-5. Write MongoDB queries to find all students with GPA above 3.5 and enrolled in “CS101”.
Ans. db.students.find({
  gpa: { $gt: 3.5 },
  course: "CS101"
})
